---
layout: chapter
title: Scales 
---


## major scales

### the c major scale

We already know that the natural notes form a c major scale. That is to say that they form a series of 8 notes, with tones and semitones arranged in this way: semitones between notes 3-4 and 7-8. This is really what a major scale is, and it's important that you memorise that. 

### other major scales



try g major
(notice that the major scale is the same tetrachord twice, so start on G 
)

iterate 


try flats and iterate 

we usually stop after 7 sharps or flats, as by then we have sharpened or flattened every note. 

### Key signatures

If we want to write the D major scale, or music that uses the notes from the D mjaor scale, instead of writing f and c sharps, we will write a key signature. 

Make chart of all the key signatures. 


### practice writing scales 

Try writing a major scale by thinking about the pattern of tones and sts. 

You will see that by the end  (as long as you do it right) your sharp or flats fit the key signature of the scale. 


### key signatures for all major scales 


Aside: as a tip that might help you identify key signatures for major scales: 
- no major scale without flat in the name has any flats, except f major 
- for a major scale with sharps, the last sharp in the key sign is the seventh note
- for a major scale with flats, the tonic is the second-to-last flat




## minor scales 

There is another kind of scale that we need to study: minor scales. 

Minor scales are a bit more coplicated, becuase there are different forms of the minor scales that you need to learn, and they involve accidentals (this means that the sharps and flat required can't be determined by a key signature). 

Like the major scales, the minor scales have their own particular patterns of tones and semitones. 

There are 3 forms of minor scale we will look at: 
- natural
- harmonic 
- melodic 

### natural minor scales and key signatures 


### a minor natural

We will start by looking at A minor. 

A minor is the key with no sharps and flats in the key signature (like c major). 

introduce relative keys!

A minor natural has no sharps or flats at all, so this is an A minor natural scale. 

You can see that the semitones are between notes 2-3 and 5-6. 

### other natural minor scales 

You might also have noticed that we can do what we did for the major scales: start on note 5, and try to for a natural minor from there; we will need to just sharpen the F again! and we will obtain E minor natural. notice that this is also the scale with one sharp starting on note 6 of it's relative, or a minor 3rd below G.

We can also start on note 4, a perfect 5th below, and form D minor by flattening the B. 


establish all key signatures for minor scales 


### harmonic and melodic forms 

The natural minor scale, is not really used. The forms of the minor scale you will encounter are the melodic and harmonic. But to form these, we will start with the natural minor scale and we will need to raise some notes.

When we say raise, we mean raise by a semitone with an accidetal, so an F would become an F#, an Eb would become an E. 

For the melodic scale, we will see that it is not the same going up and going down (we usually use the words ascending and descending). 

### harmonic minors

To form a harmonic scale, we take the natural minor and we raise note 7 (going up and going down)

EXAmples:

a minor

C minor

G# minor

others

When you write harmonic scales like this, make sure you write the accidental on note 7 going down as well. 

### melodic minors 

For the melodic scale, we will start with the natural minor and we will raise notes 6 and 7 GOING UP ONLY. 

This means that going down, the melodic is exactly the same as the natural. 

Examples: 

A mninor 

C minor

G# minor

When you write out minor melodic scales like this, make sure you write accidentals on notes 6 and 7 going down as well, just to avoid any confusion. 

### why are these notes raised in the harmonic and melodic scales? 






## building your intuition for scales 

play around, goign from major to minor melodic or harmonic, 

think about the intervals fomred between notes in the various scales. 








## a note on key signatures 

It's important not to confuse the raised 6th and 7th notes with the key signature. 
A minor has F# and G# in some of its scales, but it doesn't mean that the key signature has any sharps. 

HOWEVER, music is what it is because of how it sounds, and an F sharp will sound an F sharp whether it is written in the key signature, or in front of a specific note. 


At the end of the day, a key signature is just a useful tool for writing the notes we want to write in a way that is practical to write and to read. 



## why these scales and not others?